User documentation for Priority and Fairness (flowcontrol/v1) (#19319)
kubernetes/website: content/en/docs/concepts/cluster-administration/flow-control.md

---
title: API Server Flow Control
content_template: templates/concept
min-kubernetes-server-version: v1.18
---

{{% capture overview %}}

Controlling the behavior of the Kubernetes API server in an overload situation
is a key task for cluster administrators. The{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="kube-apiserver" text="kube-apiserver" >}} has some controls
available (i.e. the `--max-requests-inflight` and
`--max-mutating-requests-inflight` command-line flags) to limit the amount of
outstanding work that will be accepted, preventing a flood of inbound requests

> from overloading and potentially crashing the API server, but beyond that, the

Reviewer: The new feature is not an addition to the old max-inflight feature but rather a replacement.

> Priority and Fairness (or flow-control) API provides a configurable mechanism to

Reviewer: I think we should stick to one user-facing name for this new feature (and also make all the code to use it, but that is not relevant to this PR).  I think we have converged on the name "API Priority and Fairness" for the feature.  Including "API" in the name is important because there are other places in the system where priority and fairness could conceivably appear.

Reviewer 2: +1. should fix it to "API Priority and Fairness". we had several names in the past. neither of e.g. "APIRequestManagement", "Priority and Fairness", "flow-control" or "rate-limitting" should appear in the doc for clarification..

> ensure that in a high-load situation, forward progress will be made on the right

Reviewer 2: i suppose this overview only covers the aspect of controlling bursty traffic in protection of API server, while another aspect of the feature is to provide a configurable requests __fairness__ among namespaces. we should note that it's also a mechnism of noise-proofing/isolation for namespaces/tenants

> requests. It also allows for a limited amount of queuing, so that in the event

Reviewer: The wording "progress will be made on the right requests" makes it sound like there is a clear and simple binary judgement being made.  While it is true that ultimately there _is_ a binary decision (accept or reject), that is actually the result of a more complex process that I think of in terms of dividing up server resources among competing flows.

Reviewer: I am all for sparing users from seeing implementation details, but this is a question of what this feature is all about.  Users of it need to clearly understand that it is about dividing server capacity among flows; in my opinion any attempt to make it look simpler will cause problems by giving users the wrong idea of what is going on.

of _bursty_ traffic that remains below acceptable levels on average, no requests
need be dropped.

> 

Reviewer: It should also be said that this feature --- like the max inflight limiting --- applies only to requests that are not "longrunning".

{{% /capture %}}

{{% capture body %}}

## Enabling the Flow Control API

{{< feature-state state="alpha"  for_k8s_version="v1.18" >}}

The Flow Control API is part of the API Priority and Fairness
[feature](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/20190228-priority-and-fairness.md),

> which is not enabled by default. To enable it, add the following command-line flags

Reviewer: The exhibited code turns on not only the interface (API) but also the implementation.  I would word this more like "To enable API Priority and Fairness ...".

to your `kube-apiserver` invocation:

```shell
kube-apiserver \
--feature-gates=APIPriorityAndFairness=true \

> --runtime-config=flowcontrol.apiserver.k8s.io/v1alpha1=true \

Reviewer 2: we should remind user of the flag "--enable-inflight-quota-handler" for opting-out the feature even if the feature-gate is on

 # …and other flags as usual
```

## Concepts
There are several distinct features involved in the flow control API. Incoming
requests are classified by attributes of the request using _FlowSchemas_, and
assigned to priority levels. Priority levels add a degree of isolation by
maintaining separate concurrency limits, so that requests assigned to different
priority levels cannot starve each other. Within a priority level, a
fair-queuing algorithm prevents requests from different sources from starving
each other, and allows for requests to be queued to prevent bursty traffic from
causing failed requests when the average load is acceptably low.

### Priority Levels
Without the Priority and Fairness feature enabled, overall concurrency in the
API server is limited by the `kube-apiserver` flags `--max-requests-inflight`
and `--max-mutating-requests-inflight`. With the feature enbaled, the
concurrency limit defined by these flags is divided up among a configurable set

> of _priority levels_. Incoming requests are assigned to a single priority level,

Reviewer: "Incoming requests are assigned to a single priority level" mixes pluralities.  I would say something more like "Each incoming request is assigned to a single priority level".

and each priority level will only dispatch as many concurrent requests as its
configuration allows.

The default configuration, for example, includes separate priority levels for
leader-election requests, requests from built-in {< glossary_tooltip text="controllers" term_id="controller" >}}, and requests from
Pods. This means that an ill-behaved Pod that floods the API server with
requests cannot prevent leader election or actions by the built-in controllers
from succeeding.

> ### Fair Queuing

Reviewer 2: and a brief intro about the shuffle-sharding algorithm would help users understand better

Even within a priority level there may be a large number of distinct sources of

> traffic. In an overload situation, it is valuable to prevent one consumer from

Reviewer: "consumer" is new terminology, and perhaps not the best.  I think it would be better to be more consistent with earlier terminology, and say something like "requester" or "source".

starving the others. This is handled by use of a fair-queuing algorithm to
process requests that are assigned the same priority level. Each request is

> given a _flow distinguisher_ — in the current design, this is either the

Reviewer: Each request is assigned to a _flow_.  A flow is identified by a pair of strings: the name of the flow schema and the flow distinguisher.

Reviewer 2: shall we provide a clear definition of the term "flow" in the doc? something like: "a flow is a sequence of requests issued by one or multiple clients using the same identity upon the same set of resources."?

requesting user or the resource's namespace — and the system attempts to give
approximately equal weight to requests with different flow distinguishers.

The details of the queuing algorithm are tunable for each priority level, and

> allow administrators to trade off memory use against fairness and tolerance for

Reviewer: The tuning is about latency too.  There is both a latency limit and a latency consequence to queue length and number of queues.

bursty traffic.

### Exempt requests
Some requests are considered sufficiently important that they are not subject to
any of the limitations imposed by this feature. This prevents an
improperly-configured flow control configuration from totally disabling an API

> server.

Reviewer 2: and those configurations for exempt requests are mandatory and not supposed to be modifier by the cluster administrators

## Defaults
The Priority and Fairness feature ships with a default configuration that the

> authors hope will work well for most clusters. It groups requests into five

Reviewer: That's putting it a little more strongly than we mean.  I still like the terminology we have been using, "suggested configuration".  In particular, we should more clearly invite operators to consider what configuration would work well for them.

  appropriate. To help catch configuration errors that miss classifying some
  requests, the mandatory `catch-all` priority level only allows one concurrency
  share and does not queue requests, making it relatively likely that traffic
  that only matches the `catch-all` FlowSchema will be rejected with an HTTP 429
  error.

## Resources
The flow control API involves two kinds of resources.
[PriorityLevelConfigurations](/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/{{< param "version" >}}/#prioritylevelconfiguration-v1alpha1-flowcontrol) 
define the available isolation classes, the share of the available concurrency
budget that each can handle, and allow for fine-tuning queuing behavior.
[FlowSchemas](/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/{{< param "version" >}}/#flowschema-v1alpha1-flowcontrol)
are used to classify individual inbound requests, matching each to a single
PriorityLevelConfiguration.

### PriorityLevelConfiguration
A PriorityLevelConfiguration represents a single isolation class. Each
PriorityLevelConfiguration has an independent limit on the number of outstanding
requests, and limitations on the number of queued requests. An example

> PriorityLevelConfiguration looks like this:

Reviewer: something is missing here --- what comes after "this:" ?

Concurrency limits for PriorityLevelConfigurations are not specified in absolute
number of requests, but rather in "concurrency shares." The total concurrency
limit for the API Server is distributed among the existing
PriorityLevelConfigurations in proportion with these shares. This allows a
cluster administrator to scale up or down the total amount of traffic to a
server by restarting `kube-apiserver` with a different value for
`--max-requests-inflight` (or `--max-mutating-requests-inflight`), and all
PriorityLevelConfigurations will see their maximum allowed concurrency go up (or
down) by the same fraction.
{{< caution >}}
With the Priority and Fairness feature enabled, the total concurrency limit for
the server is set to the sum of `--max-requests-inflight` and
`--max-mutating-requests-inflight`. There is no longer any distinction made
between mutating and non-mutating requests; if you want to treat them
separately for a given resource, make separate FlowSchemas that match the
mutating and non-mutating verbs respectively.
{{< /caution >}}
{{< caution >}}
In the present implementation, requests classified as "long-running" — primarily

> watches — are not subject to the API Priority and Fairness filter at all.

Reviewer: I think this belongs in a more prominent place, right at the start of the doc.

{{< /caution >}}

When the volume of inbound requests assigned to a single
PriorityLevelConfiguration is more than its permitted concurrency level, the
`type` field of its specification determines what will happen to extra requests.
A type of `Reject` means that excess traffic will immediately be rejected with
an HTTP 429 (Too Many Requests) error. A type of `Queue` means that requests
above the threshhold will be queued, and the fair queuing algorithm will be used

> to balance progress between requests based on their assigned flow distinguisher.

Reviewer: It is based on not just the flow identifier but also the queue.  There is another relevant factor here, the shuffle sharding of flows into queues.

Author: Queue is a function of flow identifier, so it's accurate to say that scheduling is a function of flow identifier.

Reviewer: No.  With shuffle sharding, knowing the flow identifier is not enough to compute which queue will be used.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
to balance progress between requests.
```

(adding more detail to this sentence makes it less helpful)

[KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/20190228-priority-and-fairness.md),
but in short:

* Increasing `queues` reduces the rate of collisions between different flows, at
  the cost of increased memory usage. A value of 1 here effectively disables the
  fair-queuing logic, but still allows requests to be queued.

* Increasing `queueLengthLimit` allows larger bursts of traffic to be sustained
  without dropping any requests, at the cost of increased memory usage.

* Changing `handSize` allows you to adjust the probability of collisions between
  different flows and the overall concurrency available to a single flow in an
  overload situation, traded off against resource consumption. 
    {{< note >}}
    The probability that two flows with different flow distinguishers
    can starve each other of resources is `1 / choose(queues, handSize)`. The choice
    of `handSize` that minimizes this probability is therefore `Queues / 2`. However,
    much smaller values of `handSize` will in practice make such collisions very
    unlikely while consuming less resources. A larger `handSize` also increases the

>     effective concurrency share available to a single flow in an overload situation.

Reviewer: Yes and no and but.

A large hand size has an additional down-side: just a few elephants will occupy very nearly all the queues, starving many of the mice.  In this situation, the mice do not get a larger effective concurrency share than they would with a smaller hand size.

The thing about queued requests is that they are not just holding some memory but they are also causing latency.  A major result from the networking community is that it is important to focus on limiting the latency.

    {{< /note >}}

### FlowSchema
A FlowSchema matches some inbound requests and assigns them to a

> PriorityLevelConfiguration. Every inbound request is matched against every

Reviewer: I would say that a FlowSchema assigns requests to a priority level; earlier text in this document also takes that approach.  A PriorityLevelConfiguration supplies the configuration for that priority level, but I would not say that the PriorityLevelConfiguration _is_ the priority level.

Author: Yeah, I was going with the style guide recommendation to refer to API resources by their names in this way, but you're right.

FlowSchema in turn, starting with those with highest `MatchingPrecedence` and
working down. 

{{< caution >}}
Only the first matching FlowSchema for a given request matters.
If multiple FlowSchemas match a single inbound request, it will be assigned

> based on the one with the highest `MatchingPrecedence`.

Reviewer: We could mention that when there are multiple FlowSchemas with the same MatchingPrecedence, and more than one matches a request, the one that takes effect is the one with the alphabetically earliest name.

Author: Done.

{{< /caution >}}

A FlowSchema matches a given request if at least one of its `rules`
matches. A rule matches if at least one of its `subjects` *and* at least
one of its `resourceRules` or `nonResourceRules` (depending on whether the
incoming request is for a resource or non-resource URL) matches. 

For the `name` field in subjects, and the `verbs`, `apiGroups`, `resources`,
`namespaces`, and `nonResourceURLs` fields of resource and non-resource rules,

> the wildcard `*` may be specified to match all of the appropriate object,

Reviewer: Is there a typo here?  "all of the appropriate object" looks odd to me.  Did you mean "all of the appropriate objects"?  I would suggest something a little more explicit, like "`*` matches any value of the relevant field", or maybe "`*` may be specified to indicate that the relevant field does not matter".  The latter is a little less accurate in the case of target namespace, because a field value of empty-string is used to signal that the request is not namespaced but matching that is stipulated by a different part of the rule.

Author: PTAL

effectively removing it from consideration.

A FlowSchema's `flowDistinguisherMethod` determines how requests matching that

> schema will be separated into flows for the fair queuing algorithm. It may be

Reviewer: "... separated into flows for the shuffle sharding into queues".

Author: ack

either `ByUser`, in which case one requesting user will not be able to starve
other users of capacity, or `ByNamespace`, in which case requests for resources
in one namespace will not be able to starve requests for resources in other
namespaces of capacity. The correct choice for a given FlowSchema depends on the

> resource and your particular environment.

Reviewer: 1. A FlowDistinguisherMethod may, in the future, be expanded to have more than just the Type field that it has today.  The text here is talking about the value in the Type field, so should be clear about that.

2. There is also the option to omit the flow distinguisher method, in which case the flow distinguisher string will always be the empty string.

3. Note also that the earlier identification of "flow" with "source" is right only when the flow distinguisher method type is `ByUser`.

Author: The documentation style guide prohibits forward-looking statements. I've corrected the field name though.

Added a note about the empty-string option.

I believe I've cleaned up most discussion of "sources" and the document should now consistently refer to "flows".

## Diagnostics
Every HTTP response from an API server with the priority and fairness feature
enabled will have two new headers, `X-Kubernetes-PF-FlowSchemaUID` and
`X-Kubernetes-PF-PriorityLevelUID`, noting the flow schema that matched the request
and the priority level to which it was assigned, respectively. The API objects'
names are not included in these headers in case the requesting user does not
have permission to view them, so when debugging you can use a command like 

```shell
kubectl get flowschemas -o custom-columns="uid:{metadata.uid},name:{metadata.name}"
kubectl get prioritylevelconfigurations -o custom-columns="uid:{metadata.uid},name:{metadata.name}"
```

to get a mapping of UIDs to names for both FlowSchemas and
PriorityLevelConfigurations.

## Observability
When you enable the API Priority and Fairness feature, the kube-apiserver
exports additional metrics. Monitoring these can help you determine whether your
configuration is inappropriately throttling important traffic, or find
poorly-behaved workloads that may be harming system health.

> * `apiserver_flowcontrol_rejected_requests` counts requests that were rejected,

Reviewer 2: https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/pull/88311#discussion_r382892843

the instrumentation guys are suggesting applying a "xxx_total" suffix for this metrics

Author: Deferring the change here to someone making that change in code

---

> title: Manage API Server load with the Flow Control API

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
title: API Server Flow Control
```
(because this is a concept page and not a task).

content_template: templates/concept

> min-kubernetes-server-version: v1.18

Reviewer 4: :ok_hand:

Reviewer 4: Oops, wrong button, and GitHub no longer has my work-in-progress :disappointed:

Reviewer 4: Actually this metadata is _I think_ mainly for task and tutorial pages. It seems OK to leave it in.

Author: I'll leave it in for now.

---

{{% capture overview %}}

Controlling the behavior of the Kubernetes API server in an overload situation

> is a key task for cluster administrators. The `kube-apiserver` has some controls

Reviewer 4: nit:
```suggestion
is a key task for cluster administrators. The{{< glossary_tooltip term_id="kube-apiserver" text="kube-apiserver" >}} has some controls
```

available (i.e. the `--max-requests-inflight` and
`--max-mutating-requests-inflight` command-line flags) to limit the amount of
outstanding work that will be accepted, preventing a flood of inbound requests
from overloading and potentially crashing the API server, but beyond that, the
Priority and Fairness (or flow-control) API provides a configurable mechanism to
ensure that in a high-load situation, forward progress will be made on the right
requests. It also allows for a limited amount of queuing, so that in the event
of _bursty_ traffic that remains below acceptable levels on average, no requests
need be dropped.

{{% /capture %}}

{{% capture body %}}

## Enabling the Flow Control API

> {{< feature-state state="alpha" >}}

Reviewer 4: nit:
```suggestion
{{< feature-state state="alpha"  for_k8s_version="v1.18" >}}
```

The Flow Control API is part of the API Priority and Fairness
[feature](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/20190228-priority-and-fairness.md),

> which is presently in alpha. To enable it, add the following command-line flags

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
which is not enabled by default. To enable it, add the following command-line flags
```
because the feature-state shortcode already says that the feature is alpha.

to your `kube-apiserver` invocation:

```shell
kube-apiserver \
--feature-gates=APIPriorityAndFairness=true \
--runtime-config=flowcontrol.apiserver.k8s.io/v1alpha1=true \

> (other flags as usual)

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
 # …and other flags as usual
```

Author: yeah, that's much better. Thanks!

```

## Concepts
There are several distinct features involved in the flow control API. Incoming

> requests are classified by attributes of the request using FlowSchemas, and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
requests are classified by attributes of the request using _FlowSchemas_, and
```

assigned to priority levels. Priority levels add a degree of isolation by
maintaining separate concurrency limits, so that requests assigned to different
priority levels cannot starve each other. Within a priority level, a
fair-queuing algorithm prevents requests from different sources from starving
each other, and allows for requests to be queued to prevent bursty traffic from
causing failed requests when the average load is acceptably low.

### Priority Levels
Without the Priority and Fairness feature enabled, overall concurrency in the
API server is limited by the `kube-apiserver` flags `--max-requests-inflight`
and `--max-mutating-requests-inflight`. With the feature enbaled, the
concurrency limit defined by these flags is divided up among a configurable set
of _priority levels_. Incoming requests are assigned to a single priority level,
and each priority level will only dispatch as many concurrent requests as its
configuration allows.

The default configuration, for example, includes separate priority levels for

> leader-election requests, requests from built-in controllers, and requests from

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
leader-election requests, requests from built-in {< glossary_tooltip text="controllers" term_id="controller" >}}, and requests from
```

number of requests, but rather in "concurrency shares." The total concurrency
limit for the API Server is distributed among the existing
PriorityLevelConfigurations in proportion with these shares. This allows a
cluster administrator to scale up or down the total amount of traffic to a
server by restarting `kube-apiserver` with a different value for
`--max-requests-inflight` (or `--max-mutating-requests-inflight`), and all
PriorityLevelConfigurations will see their maximum allowed concurrency go up (or
down) by the same fraction.
{{< caution >}}
With the Priority and Fairness feature enabled, the total concurrency limit for
the server is set to the sum of `--max-requests-inflight` and
`--max-mutating-requests-inflight`. There is no longer any distinction made
between mutating and non-mutating requests; if you want to treat them
separately for a given resource, make separate FlowSchemas that match the
mutating and non-mutating verbs respectively.
{{< /caution >}}
{{< caution >}}
In the present implementation, requests classified as "long-running" — primarily
watches — are not subject to the API Priority and Fairness filter at all. This

> is expected to change.

Reviewer 4: The style guide recommends [avoiding statements about the future](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#avoid-statements-about-the-future).

Author: Removed.

{{< /caution >}}

When the volume of inbound requests assigned to a single
PriorityLevelConfiguration is more than its permitted concurrency level, the
`type` field of its specification determines what will happen to extra requests.
A type of `Reject` means that excess traffic will immediately be rejected with
an HTTP 429 (Too Many Requests) error. A type of `Queue` means that requests
above the threshhold will be queued, and the fair queuing algorithm will be used
to balance progress between requests based on their assigned flow distinguisher.

The queuing configuration allows tuning the fair queuing algorithm for a
priority level. Details of the algorithm can be read in the

> [KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/20190228-priority-and-fairness.md),

Reviewer 4: I'd move that KEP link to the what's next section at the foot of the page. If that's a concern because readers might not see all the details, is it feasible to describe the algorithm in more detail?

Author: The algorithm is pretty esoteric and academic-sounding, and I think the vast majority of people have no need to know anything about its details, which is why I left it as a link. Should I just link to the what's-next section (which already has a link to the KEP) here instead?

Reviewer 4: That's how I think I'd do it. It also lets you hyperlink to other detailed information and still signpost readers to look there.

Reviewer: We could make a brief statement, something like "This algorithm is inspired by the fair queuing found in internet routers, and is adapted to cope with serving multiple requests of uncertain service time instead of transmitting a single known-length packet".

either `ByUser`, in which case one requesting user will not be able to starve
other users of capacity, or `ByNamespace`, in which case requests for resources
in one namespace will not be able to starve requests for resources in other
namespaces of capacity. The correct choice for a given FlowSchema depends on the
resource and your particular environment.

## Diagnostics
Every HTTP response from an API server with the priority and fairness feature
enabled will have two new headers, `X-Kubernetes-PF-FlowSchemaUID` and
`X-Kubernetes-PF-PriorityLevelUID`, noting the flow schema that matched the request
and the priority level to which it was assigned, respectively. The API objects'
names are not included in these headers in case the requesting user does not
have permission to view them, so when debugging you can use a command like 

```shell
kubectl get flowschemas -o custom-columns="uid:{metadata.uid},name:{metadata.name}"
kubectl get prioritylevelconfigurations -o custom-columns="uid:{metadata.uid},name:{metadata.name}"
```

to get a mapping of UIDs to names for both FlowSchemas and
PriorityLevelConfigurations.

## Observability

> The API Priority and Fairness feature, when enabled, causes several new metrics

Reviewer 4: How about:
```markdown
When you enable the API Priority and Fairness feature, the kube-apiserver exports additional metrics.
```
?

Author: Yes, that's definitely better, thanks.

    to increase that PriorityLevelConfiguration's concurrency shares.
    {{< /note >}}

* `apiserver_flowcontrol_request_concurrency_limit` gives the computed
  concurrency limit (based on the API server's total concurrency limit and PriorityLevelConfigurations'
  concurrency shares) for each PriorityLevelConfiguration.

* `apiserver_flowcontrol_request_wait_duration_seconds` gives a histogram of how
  long requests spent queued, grouped by the FlowSchema that matched the
  request, the PriorityLevel to which it was assigned, and whether or not the
  request successfully executed.
    {{< note >}}
    Since each FlowSchema always assigns requests to a single
    PriorityLevelConfiguration, you can add the histograms for all the
    FlowSchemas for one priority level to get the effective histogram for
    requests assigned to that priority level.
    {{< /note }}

* `apiserver_flowcontrol_request_execution_seconds` gives a histogram of how
  long requests took to actually execute, grouped by the FlowSchema that matched the
  request and the PriorityLevel to which it was assigned.
    

{{% /capture %}}

{{% capture whatsnext %}}

> This feature is still in alpha. Its design and future plans can be found in the [relevant

Reviewer 4: How about:
```markdown
For background information on design details for API priority and fairness, see
the [enhancement proposal](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/20190228-priority-and-fairness.md) (KEP).
```
?

Author: :+1:

KEP](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/20190228-priority-and-fairness.md).

> Feature requests and suggestions for improvements may be made to the [API

Reviewer 4: I'd write:
```markdown
You can make suggestions and feature requests via
[SIG API Machinery]((https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-api-machinery).
```

Author: :+1:

Machinery SIG](https://github.com/kubernetes/community/tree/master/sig-api-machinery).

Current plans include flow control for long-running requests (watches) and

> improved observability features (particularly logging and tracing).

Reviewer 4: [Avoid statements about the future](https://kubernetes.io/docs/contribute/style/style-guide/#avoid-statements-about-the-future). This is because this kind of text often goes out of date.

Author: :+1:

---
title: API Priority and Fairness
content_template: templates/concept
min-kubernetes-server-version: v1.18
---

{{% capture overview %}}

Controlling the behavior of the Kubernetes API server in an overload situation
is a key task for cluster administrators. The {{< glossary_tooltip
term_id="kube-apiserver" text="kube-apiserver" >}} has some controls available
(i.e. the `--max-requests-inflight` and `--max-mutating-requests-inflight`
command-line flags) to limit the amount of outstanding work that will be
accepted, preventing a flood of inbound requests from overloading and
potentially crashing the API server, but these flags are not enough to ensure
that the most important requests get through in a period of high traffic.

The API Priority and Fairness feature provides a configurable mechanism to
ensure that in a high-load situation, forward progress will be made on the right
requests. It also allows for a limited amount of queuing, so that in the event
of _bursty_ traffic that remains below acceptable levels on average, no requests

> need be dropped, and uses a fair queuing algorithm to prevent one stream of

Reviewer: How about we say "flow" here instead of "stream", since that is the term used throughout this feature?

```shell
kube-apiserver \
--feature-gates=APIPriorityAndFairness=true \
--runtime-config=flowcontrol.apiserver.k8s.io/v1alpha1=true \
 # …and other flags as usual
```

The command-line flag `--enable-priority-and-fairness=false` will disable the
API Priority and Fairness feature, even if other flags have enabled it.

## Concepts
There are several distinct features involved in the API Priority and Fairness
feature. Incoming requests are classified by attributes of the request using
_FlowSchemas_, and assigned to priority levels. Priority levels add a degree of
isolation by maintaining separate concurrency limits, so that requests assigned
to different priority levels cannot starve each other. Within a priority level,
a fair-queuing algorithm prevents requests from different _flows_ from starving
each other, and allows for requests to be queued to prevent bursty traffic from
causing failed requests when the average load is acceptably low.

### Priority Levels
Without the API Priority and Fairness feature enabled, overall concurrency in
the API server is limited by the `kube-apiserver` flags
`--max-requests-inflight` and `--max-mutating-requests-inflight`. With the

> feature enbaled, the concurrency limit defined by these flags is divided up

Reviewer: I would be a little more explicit about the fact that the values from those flags are first _summed_ and it is the sum that is then divided up.

among a configurable set of _priority levels_. Each incoming request is assigned
to a single priority level, and each priority level will only dispatch as many
concurrent requests as its configuration allows.

The default configuration, for example, includes separate priority levels for
leader-election requests, requests from built-in controllers, and requests from
Pods. This means that an ill-behaved Pod that floods the API server with
requests cannot prevent leader election or actions by the built-in controllers
from succeeding.

### Fair Queuing
Even within a priority level there may be a large number of distinct sources of
traffic. In an overload situation, it is valuable to prevent one stream of
requests from starving others (in particular, in the relatively common case of a
single buggy client flooding the kube-apiserver with requests, that buggy client
would ideally not have much measurable impact on other clients at all). This is
handled by use of a fair-queuing algorithm to process requests that are assigned

> the same priority level. Each request is assigned to a _flow_, consisting of the

Reviewer: I would say "identified by" rather than "consisting of"; what the flow _consists of_ is requests.

name of the matching FlowSchema plus a _flow distinguisher_ — in the current

> design, this is either the requesting user or the resource's namespace — and the

Reviewer: I would qualify "resource" here with "target", because some users (i.e., service accounts) are also resources.

system attempts to give approximately equal weight to requests in different

> flows.

Reviewer: "... different flows of the same priority level"

> 

Reviewer: I think a brief mention of the shuffle sharding would be helpful and not too much information here.  Something like the following.

> The requests are mapped from their flows to queues using a technique called _shuffle sharding_, which can ensure independent progress of relatively many flows using relatively few queues.

Reviewer: Done (I hope).

  built-in controllers (in particular, requests for `endpoints`, `configmaps`,
  or `leases` coming from the `system:kube-controller-manager` or
  `system:kube-scheduler` users and service accounts in the `kube-system`
  namespace). These are important to isolate from other traffic because failures
  in leader election cause their controllers to fail and restart, which in turn
  causes more expensive traffic as the new controllers sync their informers.
  
* The `workload-high` priority level is for other requests from built-in
  controllers.
  
* The `workload-low` priority level is for requests from any other service
  account, which will typically include all requests from controllers runing in
  Pods.
  
* The `global-default` priority level handles all other traffic, e.g.
  interactive `kubectl` commands run by nonprivileged users.

Additionally, there are two PriorityLevelConfigurations and two FlowSchemas that
are built in and may not be overwritten:

* The special `exempt` priority level is used for requests that are not subject
  to flow control at all: they will always be dispatched immediately. The

>   special `exempt` FlowSchema classifies all requests from the `system:master`

Reviewer: the group name uses the plural, "masters"

separately for a given resource, make separate FlowSchemas that match the
mutating and non-mutating verbs respectively.
{{< /caution >}}

When the volume of inbound requests assigned to a single
PriorityLevelConfiguration is more than its permitted concurrency level, the
`type` field of its specification determines what will happen to extra requests.
A type of `Reject` means that excess traffic will immediately be rejected with
an HTTP 429 (Too Many Requests) error. A type of `Queue` means that requests
above the threshhold will be queued, and the fair queuing algorithm will be used
to balance progress between requests based on their assigned flow distinguisher.

The queuing configuration allows tuning the fair queuing algorithm for a
priority level. Details of the algorithm can be read in the [enhancement
proposal](#what-s-next), but in short:

* Increasing `queues` reduces the rate of collisions between different flows, at
  the cost of increased memory usage. A value of 1 here effectively disables the
  fair-queuing logic, but still allows requests to be queued.

* Increasing `queueLengthLimit` allows larger bursts of traffic to be sustained

>   without dropping any requests, at the cost of increased memory usage.

Reviewer: ... and latency

* Changing `handSize` allows you to adjust the probability of collisions between
  different flows and the overall concurrency available to a single flow in an
  overload situation, traded off against resource consumption and the amount of
  queuing latency that a single flow can impose upon the system.
    {{< note >}}
    A larger `handSize` makes it less likely for two individual flows to collide
    (and therefore for one to be able to starve the other), but more likely that
    a small number of flows can dominate the apiserver. A larger `handSize` also
    potentially increases the amount of latency that a single high-traffic flow
    can add to the system. The maximum number of queued requests possible from a

>     single flow is `handSize * queueLengthLimit`. A good initial value is 1/8

Reviewer: I agree that we should give some guidance, but it can not be as simple as saying handSize should be 1/8 of the number of queues.  I think we should copy the table from https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/76846#issuecomment-523700960 here, to give a feel for how this works.

    the number of `queues`.
    {{< /note >}}

### FlowSchema
A FlowSchema matches some inbound requests and assigns them to a
priority level. Every inbound request is matched against every
FlowSchema in turn, starting with those with highest `matchingPrecedence` and

> working down. 

Reviewer: Actually, this is inverted (as is all too common in computer engineering).  Low numbers mean higher precedence.

have permission to view them, so when debugging you can use a command like 

```shell
kubectl get flowschemas -o custom-columns="uid:{metadata.uid},name:{metadata.name}"
kubectl get prioritylevelconfigurations -o custom-columns="uid:{metadata.uid},name:{metadata.name}"
```

to get a mapping of UIDs to names for both FlowSchemas and
PriorityLevelConfigurations.

## Observability
When you enable the API Priority and Fairness feature, the kube-apiserver
exports additional metrics. Monitoring these can help you determine whether your
configuration is inappropriately throttling important traffic, or find
poorly-behaved workloads that may be harming system health.

* `apiserver_flowcontrol_rejected_requests` counts requests that were rejected,
  grouped by the name of the assigned priority level and the reason for
  rejection.
    * Reason may be `queue-full`, indicating that too many requests were already
      queued (this includes the case where the PriorityLevelConfiguration is
      configured to reject rather than queue excess requests), or `time-out`,
      indicating that the request was still in the queue when its deadline
      expired.

> * `apiserver_flowcontrol_current_inqueue_requests` gives the instantaneous total

Reviewer: This is a histogram.  Each contribution to the histogram reports the queue length seen, just after enqueuing, by a request that got enqueued.  This is significantly different from an unbiased survey.

  number of queued (not executing) requests for each priority level.

* `apiserver_flowcontrol_current_executing_requests` gives the instantaneous
  total number of executing requests for each priority level.

* `apiserver_flowcontrol_request_queue_length` gives a histogram of queue

>   lengths for the queues in each priority level.

Reviewer: This is a histogram. Each contribution to the histogram reports the queue length seen, just after enqueuing, by a request that got enqueued. This is significantly different from an unbiased survey.

    (i.e., requests by one user or for one namespace, depending on
    configuration) is flooding the API server, and being throttled. By contrast,
    if one priority level's histogram shows that all queues for that priority
    level are longer than those for other priority levels, it may be appropriate
    to increase that PriorityLevelConfiguration's concurrency shares.
    {{< /note >}}

* `apiserver_flowcontrol_request_concurrency_limit` gives the computed
  concurrency limit (based on the API server's total concurrency limit and PriorityLevelConfigurations'
  concurrency shares) for each PriorityLevelConfiguration.

* `apiserver_flowcontrol_request_wait_duration_seconds` gives a histogram of how
  long requests spent queued, grouped by the FlowSchema that matched the
  request, the PriorityLevel to which it was assigned, and whether or not the
  request successfully executed.
    {{< note >}}
    Since each FlowSchema always assigns requests to a single
    PriorityLevelConfiguration, you can add the histograms for all the
    FlowSchemas for one priority level to get the effective histogram for
    requests assigned to that priority level.

>     {{< /note }}

Reviewer: "unclosed shortcode" here crashed netlify

---
title: API Priority and Fairness
content_template: templates/concept
min-kubernetes-server-version: v1.18
---

{{% capture overview %}}

Controlling the behavior of the Kubernetes API server in an overload situation
is a key task for cluster administrators. The {{< glossary_tooltip
term_id="kube-apiserver" text="kube-apiserver" >}} has some controls available
(i.e. the `--max-requests-inflight` and `--max-mutating-requests-inflight`
command-line flags) to limit the amount of outstanding work that will be
accepted, preventing a flood of inbound requests from overloading and
potentially crashing the API server, but these flags are not enough to ensure
that the most important requests get through in a period of high traffic.

The API Priority and Fairness feature is an alternative to the

> aforementioned max-inflight limitations.  This new feature classifies

Reviewer: I put the explicit "new" qualifier in there because the immediately preceding noun can also be considered a "feature" but is not the feature I mean.

> aforementioned max-inflight limitations.  This new feature classifies

Reviewer 3: Agree with both of you.
* I'd call P&F an improvement, not just an alternative feature in the preceding sentence.
* Rather than "new feature", which doesn't sound right for docs that will live many releases in the future, maybe define "P&F" as an abbreviation in the prior sentence and use it here?

> aforementioned max-inflight limitations.  This new feature classifies

Reviewer: The full name is "API Priority and Fairness", and I think the "API" qualifier is meaningful because we have considered other places to put priority and fairness (e.g., in work queues), so I am inclined to try to not drop the "API" part.  IMHO, the most natural abbreviation is "APF".

and isolates requests in a more fine-grained way.  It also introduces
a limited amount of queuing, so that no requests are rejected in cases
of very brief bursts.  Requests are dispatched from queues using a
fair queuing technique so that, for example, a poorly-behaved {{<
glossary_tooltip text="controller" term_id="controller" >}}) need not
starve others (even at the same priority level).

{{< caution >}}

> In the present implementation, requests classified as "long-running" — primarily

Reviewer 4: The page overview, even though it's for an alpha feature, should largely read the same as if it's documenting the feature after it's graduated to GA. That's the right way to summarise a concept, even if it's in alpha.

> In the present implementation, requests classified as "long-running" — primarily

Reviewer: done

watches — are not subject to the API Priority and Fairness filter. This is also
true for the `--max-requests-inflight` flag without the API Priority and
Fairness feature enabled.
{{< /caution >}}

{{% /capture %}}

{{% capture body %}}

## Enabling API Priority and Fairness

> {{< feature-state state="alpha"  for_k8s_version="v1.18" >}}

Reviewer 4: I recommend moving this above the heading “Enabling API Priority and Fairness” so that it's the first thing in the page body. Bear in mind that the feature-state shortcode will remain even after “Enabling API Priority and Fairness” is removed.

Reviewer: done

The API Priority and Fairness

> [feature](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-api-machinery/20190228-priority-and-fairness.md)

Reviewer: done

```shell
kube-apiserver \
--feature-gates=APIPriorityAndFairness=true \
--runtime-config=flowcontrol.apiserver.k8s.io/v1alpha1=true \
 # …and other flags as usual
```

The command-line flag `--enable-priority-and-fairness=false` will disable the
API Priority and Fairness feature, even if other flags have enabled it.

## Concepts
There are several distinct features involved in the API Priority and Fairness
feature. Incoming requests are classified by attributes of the request using
_FlowSchemas_, and assigned to priority levels. Priority levels add a degree of
isolation by maintaining separate concurrency limits, so that requests assigned
to different priority levels cannot starve each other. Within a priority level,
a fair-queuing algorithm prevents requests from different _flows_ from starving
each other, and allows for requests to be queued to prevent bursty traffic from
causing failed requests when the average load is acceptably low.

### Priority Levels
Without the API Priority and Fairness feature enabled, overall concurrency in
the API server is limited by the `kube-apiserver` flags
`--max-requests-inflight` and `--max-mutating-requests-inflight`. With the

> feature enbaled, the concurrency limits defined by these flags are summed and then divided up

Reviewer: oops, fixed

among a configurable set of _priority levels_. Each incoming request is assigned
to a single priority level, and each priority level will only dispatch as many
concurrent requests as its configuration allows.

The default configuration, for example, includes separate priority levels for
leader-election requests, requests from built-in controllers, and requests from
Pods. This means that an ill-behaved Pod that floods the API server with
requests cannot prevent leader election or actions by the built-in controllers
from succeeding.

### Queuing
Even within a priority level there may be a large number of distinct sources of
traffic. In an overload situation, it is valuable to prevent one stream of
requests from starving others (in particular, in the relatively common case of a
single buggy client flooding the kube-apiserver with requests, that buggy client
would ideally not have much measurable impact on other clients at all). This is
handled by use of a fair-queuing algorithm to process requests that are assigned
the same priority level. Each request is assigned to a _flow_, identified by the

> name of the matching FlowSchema plus a _flow distinguisher_ — in the current

Reviewer: done

design, this is either the requesting user or the target resource's namespace — and the
system attempts to give approximately equal weight to requests in different
flows of the same priority level.

After classifying a request into a flow, the API Priority and Fairness
feature then may assign the request to a queue.  This assignment uses
a technique known as _shuffle sharding_, and it makes relatively
efficient use of queues to insulate light flows from heavy flows.

The details of the queuing algorithm are tunable for each priority level, and
allow administrators to trade off memory use, fairness (the property that
independent flows will all make progress when total traffic exceeds capacity),
tolerance for bursty traffic, and the added latency induced by queuing.

### Exempt requests
Some requests are considered sufficiently important that they are not subject to

> any of the limitations imposed by this feature. This prevents an

Reviewer: done

improperly-configured flow control configuration from totally disabling an API
server.

## Defaults
The Priority and Fairness feature ships with a suggested configuration that
should suffice for experimentation; administrators of clusters likely to
experience heavy load should consider what configuration will work best for

> their system. The suggested configuration groups requests into five priority

Reviewer: done

cluster administrator to scale up or down the total amount of traffic to a
server by restarting `kube-apiserver` with a different value for
`--max-requests-inflight` (or `--max-mutating-requests-inflight`), and all
PriorityLevelConfigurations will see their maximum allowed concurrency go up (or
down) by the same fraction.
{{< caution >}}
With the Priority and Fairness feature enabled, the total concurrency limit for
the server is set to the sum of `--max-requests-inflight` and
`--max-mutating-requests-inflight`. There is no longer any distinction made
between mutating and non-mutating requests; if you want to treat them
separately for a given resource, make separate FlowSchemas that match the
mutating and non-mutating verbs respectively.
{{< /caution >}}

When the volume of inbound requests assigned to a single
PriorityLevelConfiguration is more than its permitted concurrency level, the
`type` field of its specification determines what will happen to extra requests.
A type of `Reject` means that excess traffic will immediately be rejected with
an HTTP 429 (Too Many Requests) error. A type of `Queue` means that requests

> above the threshhold will be queued, and the shuffle sharding and fair queuing algorithms will be used

Reviewer: "will be" matches the tense in the introductory sentence ("what will happen").

proposal](#what-s-next), but in short:

* Increasing `queues` reduces the rate of collisions between different flows, at
  the cost of increased memory usage. A value of 1 here effectively disables the
  fair-queuing logic, but still allows requests to be queued.

* Increasing `queueLengthLimit` allows larger bursts of traffic to be
  sustained without dropping any requests, at the cost of increased
  latency and memory usage.

* Changing `handSize` allows you to adjust the probability of collisions between
  different flows and the overall concurrency available to a single flow in an
  overload situation, traded off against resource consumption and the amount of
  queuing latency that a single flow can impose upon the system.
    {{< note >}}
    A larger `handSize` makes it less likely for two individual flows to collide
    (and therefore for one to be able to starve the other), but more likely that
    a small number of flows can dominate the apiserver. A larger `handSize` also
    potentially increases the amount of latency that a single high-traffic flow
    can add to the system. The maximum number of queued requests possible from a

>     single flow is `handSize * queueLengthLimit`.

Reviewer: I am comfortable using the notation common in programming languages here, because we are using markup that identifies the text as code.

    {{< /note >}}

Following is a table showing an interesting collection of shuffle
sharding configurations, printing for each the probability that a
given mouse (light flow) is squished by an elephant (heavy flow) for
an illustrative collection of numbers of elephants. See
https://play.golang.org/p/Gi0PLgVHiUg , which computes this table; the
later entries are of theoretical interest only.

|HandSize|   DeckSize|	1 elephant|		4 elephants|		16 elephants|

> |--------|-----------|------------|----------------|--------------------|

Reviewer: done

one of its `resourceRules` or `nonResourceRules` (depending on whether the
incoming request is for a resource or non-resource URL) matches the request.

For the `name` field in subjects, and the `verbs`, `apiGroups`, `resources`,
`namespaces`, and `nonResourceURLs` fields of resource and non-resource rules,
the wildcard `*` may be specified to match all values for the given field,
effectively removing it from consideration.

A FlowSchema's `distinguisherMethod.type` determines how requests matching that
schema will be separated into flows. It may be
either `ByUser`, in which case one requesting user will not be able to starve
other users of capacity, or `ByNamespace`, in which case requests for resources
in one namespace will not be able to starve requests for resources in other
namespaces of capacity, or it may be blank (or `distinguisherMethod` may be
omitted entirely), in which case all requests matched by this FlowSchema will be
considered part of a single flow. The correct choice for a given FlowSchema
depends on the resource and your particular environment.

## Diagnostics
Every HTTP response from an API server with the priority and fairness feature

> enabled will have two new headers, `X-Kubernetes-PF-FlowSchemaUID` and

Reviewer: done

The API Priority and Fairness feature is an alternative to the
aforementioned max-inflight limitations.  This new feature classifies
and isolates requests in a more fine-grained way.  It also introduces
a limited amount of queuing, so that no requests are rejected in cases
of very brief bursts.  Requests are dispatched from queues using a
fair queuing technique so that, for example, a poorly-behaved {{<
glossary_tooltip text="controller" term_id="controller" >}}) need not
starve others (even at the same priority level).

{{< caution >}}
Requests classified as "long-running" — primarily watches — are not
subject to the API Priority and Fairness filter. This is also true for
the `--max-requests-inflight` flag without the API Priority and
Fairness feature enabled.
{{< /caution >}}

{{% /capture %}}

{{% capture body %}}

## Enabling API Priority and Fairness

The API Priority and Fairness feature is controlled by a feature gate
and is not enabled by default.  See
[Feature Gates](/docs/reference/command-line-tools-reference/feature-gates/)
for a general explanation of enabling or disabling feature gates.  The
name of the relevant feature gate is "APIPriorityAndFairness".  This

> feature involves a new {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="api-group"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
feature also involves an {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="api-group"
```

> text="API Group" >}} that must also be enabled.  You cam do these

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
text="API Group" >}} that must be enabled.  You can do these
```

from succeeding.

### Queuing
Even within a priority level there may be a large number of distinct sources of
traffic. In an overload situation, it is valuable to prevent one stream of
requests from starving others (in particular, in the relatively common case of a
single buggy client flooding the kube-apiserver with requests, that buggy client
would ideally not have much measurable impact on other clients at all). This is
handled by use of a fair-queuing algorithm to process requests that are assigned
the same priority level. Each request is assigned to a _flow_, identified by the
name of the matching FlowSchema plus a _flow distinguisher_ — which
is either the requesting user, the target resource's namespace, or nothing — and the
system attempts to give approximately equal weight to requests in different
flows of the same priority level.

After classifying a request into a flow, the API Priority and Fairness
feature then may assign the request to a queue.  This assignment uses
a technique known as {{< glossary_tooltip term_id="shuffle-sharding"
text="shuffle sharding" >}}, which makes relatively efficient use of

> queues to insulate light flows from heavy flows.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
queues to insulate low-traffic flows from high-traffic flows.
```

are used to classify individual inbound requests, matching each to a single
PriorityLevelConfiguration.

### PriorityLevelConfiguration
A PriorityLevelConfiguration represents a single isolation class. Each
PriorityLevelConfiguration has an independent limit on the number of outstanding
requests, and limitations on the number of queued requests.

Concurrency limits for PriorityLevelConfigurations are not specified in absolute
number of requests, but rather in "concurrency shares." The total concurrency
limit for the API Server is distributed among the existing
PriorityLevelConfigurations in proportion with these shares. This allows a
cluster administrator to scale up or down the total amount of traffic to a
server by restarting `kube-apiserver` with a different value for
`--max-requests-inflight` (or `--max-mutating-requests-inflight`), and all
PriorityLevelConfigurations will see their maximum allowed concurrency go up (or
down) by the same fraction.
{{< caution >}}
With the Priority and Fairness feature enabled, the total concurrency limit for
the server is set to the sum of `--max-requests-inflight` and
`--max-mutating-requests-inflight`. There is no longer any distinction made

> between mutating and non-mutating requests; if you want to treat them

Reviewer 3: Did we drop the part where they had different weights?

Reviewer: yes.  We discussed it in a meeting; you and/or @deads2k argued against weighting them differently.

A type of `Reject` means that excess traffic will immediately be rejected with
an HTTP 429 (Too Many Requests) error. A type of `Queue` means that requests
above the threshold will be queued, with the shuffle sharding and fair queuing techniques used
to balance progress between requests based on their assigned flow distinguisher.

The queuing configuration allows tuning the fair queuing algorithm for a
priority level. Details of the algorithm can be read in the [enhancement
proposal](#what-s-next), but in short:

* Increasing `queues` reduces the rate of collisions between different flows, at
  the cost of increased memory usage. A value of 1 here effectively disables the
  fair-queuing logic, but still allows requests to be queued.

* Increasing `queueLengthLimit` allows larger bursts of traffic to be
  sustained without dropping any requests, at the cost of increased
  latency and memory usage.

* Changing `handSize` allows you to adjust the probability of collisions between
  different flows and the overall concurrency available to a single flow in an
  overload situation, traded off against resource consumption and the amount of

>   queuing latency that a single flow can impose upon the system.

Reviewer 3: I had to read this sentence 5 times. I think it is clearer if we remove everything after the comma (" traded off...").

    {{< note >}}
    A larger `handSize` makes it less likely for two individual flows to collide
    (and therefore for one to be able to starve the other), but more likely that
    a small number of flows can dominate the apiserver. A larger `handSize` also

>     potentially increases the amount of latency that a single high-traffic flow

Reviewer 3: but this latency is primarily observed by the high-traffic flow, no?

    can add to the system. The maximum number of queued requests possible from a
    single flow is `handSize * queueLengthLimit`.
    {{< /note >}}

Following is a table showing an interesting collection of shuffle
sharding configurations, showing for each the probability that a

> given mouse (light flow) is squished by the elephants (heavy flows) for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
given mouse (low-traffic flow) is squished by the elephants (high-traffic flows) for
```

Although I'd prefer to introduce "mice" and "elephants" earlier and use them everywhere instead of "x-traffic flow".

Reviewer: I think a more radical re-organization is in order, and that would include doing a better job of introducing metaphors at the right place.  Right now this concept page carries too much weight, and the glossary entry also carries a lot of weight and it is too isolated.  I think there should be some reference material as well.  But this is too big a project to cram in right now.

an illustrative collection of numbers of elephants. See
https://play.golang.org/p/Gi0PLgVHiUg , which computes this table; the

> later entries are of theoretical interest only.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps omit the later ones, and this disclaimer.
